Semantic Zoom and Mini-Maps for Software Cities
Malte Hansen
Department of Computer Science
Kiel University
Kiel, Germany
malte.hansen@email.uni-kiel.de
Jens Bamberg
Department of Computer Science
Kiel University
Kiel, Germany
jdbamberg@outlook.de
Noe Baumann
Department of Computer Science
Kiel University
Kiel, Germany
stu237899@mail.uni-kiel.de
Wilhelm Hasselbring
Department of Computer Science
Kiel University
Kiel, Germany
hasselbring@email.uni-kiel.de
Abstract—Software visualization tools can facilitate program
comprehension by providing visual metaphors, or abstractions
that reduce the amount of textual data that needs to be processed
mentally. One way they do this is by enabling developers to
build an internal representation of the visualized software and
its architecture. However, as the amount of displayed data in the
visualization increases, the visualization itself can become more
difficult to comprehend. The ability to display small and large
amounts of data in visualizations is called visual scalability.
In this paper, we present two approaches to address the
challenge of visual scalability in 3D software cities. First, we
present an approach to semantic zoom, in which the graphical
representation of the software landscape changes based on the
virtual camera’s distance from visual objects. Second, we aug-
ment the visualization with a miniature two-dimensional top-view
projection called mini-map. We demonstrate our approach using
an open-source implementation in our software visualization
tool ExplorViz. ExplorViz is web-based and uses the 3D city
metaphor, focusing on live trace visualization.
We evaluated our approaches in two separate user studies. The
results indicate that semantic zoom and the mini-map are both
useful additions. User feedback indicates that semantic zoom and
mini-maps are especially useful for large software landscapes
and collaborative software exploration. The studies indicate a
good usability of our implemented approaches. However, some
shortcomings in our implementations have also been discovered,
to be addressed in future work.
Video URL: https://youtu.be/LYtUeWvizjU
Index Terms—software visualization, city metaphor, web, 3D,
semantic zoom, mini-map, program comprehension
I. INTRODUCTION
Software visualization approaches can be used for various
software engineering tasks. Scientific works in the field of
software visualization have explored the visualization of a
multitude of data with several visual metaphors [1]. Since a
great amount of time is spent reading source code in software
development, tools that reduce the necessary time to compre-
hend source code can speed up software development [2]–[4].
Software visualization can aid the task of program comprehen-
sion through visual metaphors, i.e. abstractions that reduce the
amount of text which needs to be mentally processed while
still allowing developers to build an internal representation of
the software and its architecture in their mind [5]. Whenever
the amount of information that should be visualized becomes
too large, the visualization faces similar challenges as the
underlying data in terms of comprehensibility. This issue is
known as visual scalability and making a visualization scalable
has been acknowledged as one of the largest visualization
research problems [6], [7].
To visualize complex datasets or add additional information
to a visualization such as metrics, 3D software visualization
techniques are popular [8], [9]. The city metaphor, in par-
ticular, is popular in 3D software visualization and has been
successfully used to convey the structure and behavior of
software systems [10]–[12].
In this paper, we present two approaches to address the issue
of visual scalability in 3D software cities. The approaches are
made concrete through implementations in our open-source
software visualization tool ExplorViz. First, we add features
for semantic zoom, whereby the graphical representation of
the software landscape changes based on the virtual camera’s
distance from visual objects. Additionally, we augment the
visualization with a miniature two-dimensional top-view pro-
jection called mini-map.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In
the upcoming section, we present related work in the field
of semantic zoom and mini-maps. Section III introduces the
status quo of ExplorViz before our additions. In Section IV,
we introduce semantic zoom as an addition to ExplorViz.
The conceptualization and implementation of the mini-map
is presented in Section V. Both approaches are evaluated in
Section VI. Section VII gives a summary of the paper and
outlines potential future work.
II. RELATED WORK
Early related work on ExplorViz is the hierarchical software
landscape visualization for system comprehension [13]. Below,
we discuss related works on semantic zoom and mini-maps.
arXiv:2510.00003v1  [cs.SE]  26 Aug 2025
A. Semantic Zoom
Semantic zoom is a widely researched topic for 2D visual-
izations, especially considering graph visualizations.
Storey et al. present a visualization technique to explore a
nested graph view that conveys information on a software’s
structure [14]. They combine a fisheye-view with the ability
to pan and zoom in the visualization. Magnifying a subgraph
via zooming may lead to shrinking or removal of other parts
of the graph. In the presented graph structure, certain nodes
can contain source code that is hidden by default and only
visible at a certain magnification. Clicking on a node further
increases its size so that the presented source code becomes
more readable. The approach of Storey et al., although not
coined as semantic zooming, is an early implementation of
semantic zoom in software visualization.
Wiens et al. present semantic zooming for ontology graph
visualizations [15]. The underlying ontology data can lead
to graph representations with many intersecting edges and
a high degree of visual complexity. They address this issue
by introducing different layers with various level of details.
For example, edges may be aggregated and labels can be
hidden. Wiens et al. conducted a study with 12 participants,
who were divided into two groups. Participants of both groups
solved tasks with and without the implemented semantic
zoom features. In the end, participants were asked to rate
their experience, including the readability, visual clarity, and
information clarity. In that study, the semantic zoom approach
outperformed the version without semantic zoom. However,
the participants asked for additional indicators, tooltips, and
reported back a steep learning curve.
Kasperowski et al. present an approach called KIELER,
a framework for automatic diagramming of complex sys-
tems [16]. A key feature to enable the exploration of large
diagrams is a semantic zoom approach, which the authors call
smart zoom. The approach focuses on hierarchically organized
diagrams and adapts the level of detail depending on the
current zoom level. A user only needs to zoom and drag in the
diagram to make use of this feature. Elements in the diagram
can be hidden or scaled and important labels or icons are
appropriately scaled and positioned to keep them visible when
zoomed out. The semantic zoom approach is showcased with
a large state chart diagram.
De Luca et al. present an interactive graph visualization
with semantic zoom for multi-level trees [17]. Different layers
are computed to visualize the graph appropriately for various
zoom levels. Inspired by common visualization techniques
for maps, they present seven desirable visual properties for
their visualization. These include common techniques like the
minimization of edge crossings or that details may not be
hidden when increasing the zoom.
Other approaches include CodeCanvas by DeLine and Kael
that introduces semantic zoom to the user interface of code
editors [18]. K¨oth et al. present an approach for semantic zoom
for visual UML editors [19].
In the realm of software visualization, Frisch et al. present
an approach to apply semantic zooming techniques to UML
diagrams [20]. They introduce different levels of details and
allow to focus visual elements. In addition, they add visual
indicators which support the navigation and orientation when
zoomed in.
EvoSpaces visualizes complex software systems as 3D soft-
ware cities [21]. The authors describe that otherwise textured
buildings can be made transparent to reveal a visualization
of functions inside the buildings. In addition, buildings are
rendered without textures in a night view that focuses on the
visualization of traces. However, to the best of our knowledge,
there is no specific research on semantic zooming techniques
for 3D software visualization approaches.
B. Mini-Map
Mini-maps are a common feature of video games to help
users navigate. Zagata and Medy´nska-Gulij have analyzed the
mini-maps of 100 popular video games to extract their key at-
tributes [22]. The result are 8 parameters and attributes that en-
able the classification of mini-map features. These parameters
namely are shape, position, orientation, centering, projection,
base layers, proportions, and additional navigational elements.
In the sample of video games, the shape is typically a circle
or rectangular, the mini-map usually placed in the bottom left
or top right, the orientation is camera based or static, and the
centering is to 80% player-based. In addition, the projection is
almost always orthographic, artificial base layers are used, and
a mini-map usually takes up 1.1-4% of the screen. Finally, the
mini-map may be augmented with additional elements, mostly
including arrows. For our approach to adapt mini-maps for 3D
software cities (see Section V), we build on these results.
In the realm of software visualization, FlyThruCode by
Oberhauser et al. is an approach to visualize software by using
a combination of the universe and terrestrial metaphor [23].
In the universe metaphor, each class is represented as a
planet, and packages are represented by solar systems. For the
terrestrial metaphor, planets can be visited with a spaceship
and buildings, representing classes on the planet, may be
inspected. The terrestrial view of FlyThruCode uses a small
mini-map in the top right corner. Due to its small size, it must
be clicked to be displayed in an enlarged and readable view.
Our approach is similar, but we have expanded the concept to
be more prominent, configurable, and interactive.
Aside from FlyThruCode, we are not aware of similar mini-
map implementations in 3D software visualization tools. Code
Park by Khaloo et al. is a visualization approach inspired
by video games [24] that offers a bird’s view. This view is
similar to the perspective that a mini-map would take but is
implemented as an alternative view and not added as part of
another view.
CodeMetropolis by Balogh and Besz´edes uses the 3D game
Minecraft to visualize code [25]. They mention the plan to
implement a mini-map as future work to improve the support
for navigation.
A related concept of mini-maps is the polymetric view in
software visualization that offers multiple perspectives on the
same software [26], [27].
III. BACKGROUND
Fig. 1: A visualization of the distributed PetClinic in the
web interface of ExplorViz. Six applications are visualized
with a grey foundation and hierarchically stacked packages in
blue and green. Packages can contain classes. Communication
between classes is visualized with yellow arcs.
ExplorViz is our web-based software visualization tool
which employs the city metaphor [28]–[30].
The visualization focuses on the visualization of package
structures, classes, and the live visualization of execution
traces. Dynamic program analysis is employed to collect run-
time data, e.g., with NovaTec’s Java agent inspectIT Ocelot1 or
Kieker [31]–[34]. The traces are exported to a Collector com-
ponent and need to adhere to the OpenTelemetry2 standard.
This enables ExplorViz to process traces from various sources,
as long as the traces are compliant with OpenTelemetry’s
standard. As long as method calls that make up a trace also
carry the information about their class of origin, this suffices
for ExplorViz to reverse engineer the structure of packages
and classes.
In addition, static program analysis can be employed to
collect data on classes for different software versions. Thus,
it can be tracked which classes have been added or removed
throughout the software’s evolution.
The backend of ExplorViz consists mostly of services
that employ the Quarkus3 framework with Java or Kotlin.
An exception is the collaboration service, which is written
in Node.js.4 The collaboration service supports multi-user
collaboration for desktop computers, as well as for augmented
1https://www.inspectit.rocks
2https://opentelemetry.io
3https://quarkus.io/
4https://nodejs.org/en
and virtual reality devices [35]. Messages to synchronize
the visualization between multiple users are exchanged via
WebSocket connections. Messages between Quarkus services
are exchanged via Apache Kafka5.
The web interface of ExplorViz is written in JavaScript,
while three.js6 is used as a library to render the 3D scene.
Figure 1 illustrates the visualization in the frontend of Ex-
plorViz of a distributed version of the PetClinic.7 Applications
are visualized as cities with a gray foundation. Packages are
represented by green and blue boxes that represent districts in
the city metaphor. Classes are represented as blue buildings
inside districts. Text labels are placed on the visual entities
with their corresponding name.
The yellow arcs between classes represent the accumulated
method calls between the objects of the given classes. Black
arrows on the arcs indicate the direction of communication.
For applications, packages, classes, and communication, more
detailed information is displayed in a popover when hovered
with a mouse.
IV. SEMANTIC ZOOM
Definition and Categorization Semantic zoom has multiple
definitions: It is mostly compared with the geometric zoom
or physical zoom, which only scales the objects, but does
not present further information. Semantic zoom is described
to change the structure of objects that are to be displayed.
This may include changes in shape or appearance in any way
to display other data on different spatial scales [36]. Many
related works that focus on semantic zoom do only consider
2D representation of data [15], [37]. Compared to semantic
zoom, the term level of detail (LoD) refers to the mechanism of
displaying visual objects with different numbers of polygons.
This is a common technique in complex 3D environments,
such as in video games, to optimize performance. There are
three major LoD variants.
First, there is discrete LoD. The application receives mul-
tiple preprocessed versions of an object with a varying num-
ber of polygons. Subsequently, the software determines the
optimal choice. As the angle of the object is not known in
the preprocessing step, it is not possible to implement any
optimizations in that regard.
The next significant LoD variant is the continuous LoD
variant. The data structure for an object is streamed at runtime
and provides enhanced granularity. Refinements could also be
streamed via a slow internet connection.
Lastly, there is view-dependent LoD. It is a combination
of continuous LoD and viewing angle. It is possible for larger
objects to have a greater degree of granularity of polygons that
are in closer proximity to the viewer, while simultaneously
reducing the number of polygons in the far distance from
the viewer. However, despite this variation, the object remains
coherent [38].
5https://kafka.apache.org/
6https://github.com/mrdoob/three.js
7https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-microservices
Fig. 2: Visualization in ExplorViz with enabled semantic zoom feature. Among other changes, packages close to the camera are
opened, classes are augmented with colored indicators for methods, and arrows on communication lines indicate the direction
of the underlying requests. An opened settings component to the right allows to customize the semantic zoom.
In general, LoD focuses on the reduction of meshes and
polygons for an object. Even though the goals of semantic
zoom and LoD differ, the categorization in discrete, continu-
ous, view-dependent can be made for both.
Concept We intend to employ semantic zooms to be able to
display more data when zoomed in and adapt or hide visual
elements when zooming out. Particularly, we add the following
visual changes to ExplorViz:
1) The height of classes can change. The metric of how
many instances have been created of that class is taken
into account.
2) Meshes representing methods of a class are attached in
a stack to the class mesh and adopt their height. The
height of an individual method mesh represents the lines
of code (LoC) in relation to the other methods of that
class.
3) Method meshes can be hidden.
4) The size of class labels can change.
5) With increasing size, labels will be shortened to avoid
overlaps with other labels.
6) The thickness of communication can be changed.
7) The curvature of the communication can be adapted to
make them more visible when zoomed out.
8) Communication and their indicators for the direction
of the communication can be hidden. This takes the
number of requests into account that the communication
visualizes.
9) Packages can be closed automatically, thereby hiding
all inner classes and subpackages. Labels of closed
packages are centered and communication is aggregated
for closed packages.
These changes are designed to improve the overview when
zoomed out. In Figure 2, a screenshot illustrates the distance-
dependent visualization introduced by our semantic zoom
approach. The semantic zoom is an extension that aligns
itself well with previously implemented filter options and
popovers that show additional information when hovering over
packages, classes, or communication links. In combination,
this follows the paradigm of “overview first, zoom and fil-
ter, then details-on-demand,” also known as Shneiderman’s
mantra [39].
Implementation As the appearance of objects should change
with their distance to the camera, a change in the camera’s
position is the trigger for the (re-)computation. However, the
naive approach would require to compute the distance between
the camera and almost all objects in the 3D scene. Especially
for large software landscapes, this is computationally demand-
ing. Therefore, we cluster all relevant 3D objects in advance
and only compute the distance to the centroids of the clusters.
It can be configured whether clustering is performed with
the k-Means [40] or Mean Shift [41] clustering algorithm.
Both of them are centroid-based clustering algorithms that
automatically provide us with center points. The number of
clusters is a trade-off between performance and the spatial
granularity of the semantic zoom, whereas the given landscape
and performance of the user’s hardware are important. There-
fore, users may configure the number of computed clusters in
the web interface.
Every object that is able to change its appearance imple-
ments an interface for semantic zoom. When the distance
changes, objects are triggered and then each object can decide
which appearance it takes (most of the time the appearance
does no change at all). Therefore, our implementation falls in
the same category as discrete LoD [38]. As the distances at
which changes in the appearance should occur may be influ-
enced by different factors, such as the size of the monitor or
user preference, a user can change which level of appearance
is triggered at which distance.
V. MINI-MAP
Mini-maps are commonly used in video games to aid
navigating the world. We adapted this concept and developed
an implementation in our tool ExplorViz. Figure 3 showcases
our implemented approach with the distributed PetClinic. The
visual properties of the mini-map are mostly chosen in accor-
dance with the results of Zagata and Medy´nska-Gulij [22]. The
shape is rectangular which aligns the mini-map with the mostly
rectangular and axes-aligned visual elements of ExplorViz. We
position the mini-map in the top right corner, since a placement
at the bottom of the page would interfere with our timeline for
selecting a timestamp. A static orientation instead of a player-
centric approach is used since the visual elements have a static
orientation and it allows us to display textual hints which do
not need to be rotated.
For centering, we are mostly world-centered to keep the
mini-map mostly static. In addition, we ensure that always
some part of the software landscape is visible in the mini-
map to prevent a “whiteout.” The employed projection is or-
thographic, such that our rectangular elements are not affected
by perspective skews. The base layer is usually artificial in
mini-maps. Since ExplorViz already uses a simplified view and
no complex 3D meshes, we stick with the original elements
but hide or adapt labels to fit the mini-map. Our mini-map
takes up around 4% of the screen, which is larger than in
most video games. However, this allows us to display more
detailed information on the mini-map and, in our experience,
does usually not occlude relevant elements in ExplorViz.
We do not employ specific navigational elements, as the
mini-map is always oriented in the same direction. As a visual
clue, we indicate the user’s position with a gray circle. We
offer two options for the position of this circular indicator,
since we use the OrbitControls of three.js, i.e. the user rotates
its camera around a point called target. Thus, we allow to
display either the camera’s or target’s position, so a user can
determine their own position or the position of what they are
looking at in the mini-map.
In a settings component, a configurable zoom enables the
user to determine how much of their surroundings should be
visualized in the mini-map.
Aside from the orthographic view and adapted labels, the
visualization mostly resembles the original top-view of Ex-
plorViz. As an addition, the own position and the position of
other color-coded users is indicated with circles on the mini-
map. These visual markers can be clicked anytime to teleport
to that user’s location, that is, the camera is placed at the
same position and in the same orientation as the other user’s
camera. Combined with the ability to colorize (highlight)
visual elements, we assume that this may help the crucial
aspect of collaboration in our software visualization [35], [42],
[43].
A mouse click on the mini-map enlarges it to fill most of
the screen (see Figure 4). This view is suitable to observe
the state of the landscape and movements of other users.
The enlarged mini-map leaves enough space, such that other
frontend components can be opened without occlusion on
either side. In the given example, an overview of the virtual
room is placed to the right of the mini-map. Clicking on the
camera next to another user’s name allows to spectate that user,
that is, the camera position and orientation and continuously
updated accordingly.
Regarding the implementation, a separate orthographic cam-
era is placed above the landscape. The additional view is
rendered on a separate canvas that is scissored8 into the
original canvas. Elements that should be hidden for the mini-
map or are specifically added are placed into separate visual
layers. Therefore, our implementation is robust to changes
in the underlying visualization and only requires to set an
appropriate layer for newly added elements that should not be
part of the mini-map visualization.
VI. EVALUATION
The semantic zoom and mini-map feature have been eval-
uated in isolation and about three months apart from one
another. Different software landscapes were used for the
evaluation. An overview of the landscapes is given in Figure 5.
Figure 5 (a) is a snapshot of the distributed PetClinic, Figure 5
(b) is the Spring PetClinic that has been extended with artificial
applications, Figure 5 (c) shows a PetClinic with duplicated
packages, Figure 5 (d) is a completely synthetic landscape that
has been generated with our trace generation tool.9 We make
all results of our surveys, the employed software artifacts, and
an accompanying video publicly available [44].
In the upcoming sections, we first present the semantic
zoom study and then go on to the mini-map evaluation.
A. Semantic Zoom Evaluation
For the evaluation of our implemented semantic zoom
feature, we are motivated by two research questions.
• RQ1 Does the semantic zoom feature increase produc-
tivity?
• RQ2 Does the semantic zoom feature improve the user
experience?
The published dataset of the study also contains results on a
feature that allows users to explore class data in an immersive
8https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/
WebGLRenderingContext/scissor
9https://github.com/ExplorViz/trace-generator
Fig. 3: View of the distributed PetClinic, with the camera zoomed in on a single application. The mini-map in the top right
corner provides a less detailed top-view of the entire software landscape.
Fig. 4: The mini-map can be temporarily enlarged. This provides an orthographic view of the software landscape. Colorings
show what was highlighted by the connected users that are displayed as colored circles. A web component with an overview
of connected users is opened to the right.
(a) Distributed PetClinic
(b) Artificial Landscape
(c) Large Landscape
(d) TraceGen XL
Fig. 5: Overview of the software landscapes and their names
that were used in our evaluation.
way [44]. However, we do not consider that feature in this
paper.
Setup All participants were invited to a computer laboratory
at Kiel University. They used a Windows computer with an
Intel Core i5-6500 CPU, a NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1070 GPU,
and a 24-inch monitor with full-HD resolution. A second
monitor was used to display the LimeSurvey tool. Google
Chrome was employed as a browser to fulfill the tasks in
ExplorViz.
Participants 16 people, who were mostly computer science
students, took part in the evaluation. Eight participants have
used ExplorViz before and eight participants had no prior
experience with ExplorViz. Among the participants with prior
experience in ExplorViz may be participants who also took
part in the evaluation of the mini-map. In accordance with
Wiens et al., each participant was assigned to a group, referred
to as group A and group B [15]. Group A was made up of
nine participants, whereas seven participants were assigned
to group B. There was an additional participant in group B,
for whom the survey tool timed out and thus no complete
data set could be collected. For the sake of completeness,
this participant’s partial data is included in the accompanying
dataset but is not considered in this paper.
Methodology The study participants were asked to com-
plete a questionnaire and work on the presented tasks. First,
the participants answered questions on their background, e.g.
experience with software development and ExplorViz. After-
wards, each participant received an introduction to ExplorViz
and could explore the semantic zoom features. In the following
main part of the study, the participants were asked to fulfill
four tasks in ExplorViz.
• Task 1 asked to find a class in the “Distributed PetClinic”
software landscape and name the underlying application.
• Task 2 asked to name all classes of a subpackage in our
“Artificial Landscape.”
• Task 3 asked which classes might be affected by a change
in a class called ”Vet” in the ”Artificial Landscape”.
• Task 4 asked to determine the direction of a communi-
cation in the “Tracegen - XL” software landscape.
Participants of group A solved Tasks 1 and 2 with enabled
semantic zoom feature and Tasks 3 and 4 without semantic
zoom enabled. For participants of group B, the use of semantic
zoom was reversed, i.e., semantic zoom was only enabled for
Tasks 3 and 4. Different software landscapes were employed
such that the participants could make use of the semantic
zoom features in different scenarios with previously unknown
applications. The tasks are designed such that participants
with different background can solve them, but all require
the exploration of the software landscape, thereby triggering
features of our implemented approach. The time needed to
fulfill the tasks was tracked and entered into the questionnaires.
In the end, the participants rated their experience and were
also asked to provide textual feedback.
Results As the tasks were designed to be solvable and foster
interaction with the visualization, almost all given answers
were correct. Only the class names that appear in the answers
for Task 3 vary.
0
50
100
150
200
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Task 4
Individual tasks with or without Semantic Zoom enabled
Time needed to fulfill the task in seconds
With Semantic Zoom
Without Semantic Zoom
Fig. 6: Mean times in seconds and their standard deviations
for each task with and without semantic zoom enabled.
Figure 6 illustrates the recorded times for the 4 tasks with
regard to the semantic zoom feature. It can be seen that
Task 3, which asked about implications for a refactoring task,
took the longest overall. The comparison of times between
participants who used semantic zoom and those who did not,
is inconclusive. Participants using semantic zoom completed
Tasks 1 and 2 faster, while the overall times are higher for
Tasks 3 and 4 with sematic zoom. Notably, the blue bar for
Task 3 contains an outlier who took 364 seconds to complete
the task, whereas the other 16 participants finished in between
37 and 145 seconds. The wide range of results is indicated by
the standard deviation, visualized as black lines in Figure 6.
Reduced View (Q8)
Semantic Zoom Overall (Q7)
Changes Noticeable (Q6)
Package Opening (Q5)
Communication (Q4)
Method Indicator (Q3)
Font Size (Q2)
Class Height (Q1)
0
5
10
15
Number of Response
Perceived Usefulness \ Likability of Semantic Zoom Feature
Very High
High
Neutral
Low
Very Low
No Advantage
Unnoticed / No Answer
Fig. 7: Overview of results regarding perceived usefulness and
likability of different features, including the semantic zoom
approach as a whole.
Figure 7 aggregates the results regarding usefulness and
likability of the added semantic zoom features.
The usefulness of changing the class height (Q1) was
perceived as high or very high by eight people, while seven
people either did not notice the change or could not rate
its usability. Textual feedback suggested to change the color
of classes that are in focus and increase the length of the
displayed class label. The automatic change of the font size
of labels (Q2) was perceived as useful by nine participants.
One participant suggested increasing the font size for closed
packages that do not display inner classes and packages.
The added method meshes (Q3) were perceived as useful
by 8 participants, while one participant did not see it as
an advantage. Regarding Communication, 13 out of 16 par-
ticipants liked that communication shrinked when zooming
in. One participant added as a feedback that the arrows to
indicate the direction of the communication should always be
visible. All but one participant liked the automatic opening
and closing of packages (Q5). Textual feedback pointed out
that this feature changes the visualization a lot and that it
might be necessary to change semantic zoom settings to avoid
that packages are opened or closed unexpectedly. Question
6 asked if visual changes when zooming were noticed and
expected. This was the case for eleven participants, while two
participants disagree. Semantic zoom was rated as useful for
daily life usage (Q7) by twelve participants, four had a neutral
opinion. The last question of Figure 7 asked participants to
rate how much they liked the view with closed packages
compared to the regular view of ExplorViz. The majority liked
the reduced view, while two disliked it.
0
5
10
15
Better Perceived Performance
Preferred Version for Interaction
Task
# of answers
No Difference / Neutral
With Semantic Zoom
Without Semantic Zoom
Fig. 8: Semantic zoom feature compared to regular version
of ExplorViz in terms of perceived performance and preferred
version for interaction in the 3D visualization.
Figure 8 presents the results regarding the question whether
the participants of our study liked the version with or without
semantic zoom more in terms of performance and for interac-
tion with the 3D visualization. Regarding performance, most
participants perceived no difference, and both for and against
semantic zoom received the same number of answers. Overall,
15 participants stated that they prefer the version with semantic
zoom, while 1 participant liked the regular version more. No
participant chose to answer neutrally for this question.
Discussion Regarding our first research question, we could
not show that our implementation increases productivity in
software visualization tasks. The results in Figure 6 exhibit
a large standard deviation such that no substantial time dif-
ference can be observed in favor or against our approach for
semantic zoom. We assume that other factors, including the
varying knowledge of participants regarding software develop-
ment and ExplorViz, in combination with the limited sample
size overshadow any effect on productivity that our approach
might have.
The overall positive ratings of usefulness and usability
show us that semantic zoom can have a positive impact
on the user experience in 3D software cities. However, the
individual ratings presented in Figure 7 and related textual
feedback shows us that it is difficult to notably change the
appearance of a visual object without being distracting to
the user. We presume that a mature animation system and
continuous changes to visual elements while preserving the
user’s mental map are crucial.
The results for perceived performance are in line with a
preliminary performance test by us, which indicates that the
version with semantic zoom has a slightly higher overall frame
rate but exhibits drops in the frames per second more often
than the regular version, thus, making it unclear which of the
two implementations is better.
Threats to Validity The participants of the study were
mostly computer science students and thus are not representa-
tives of the group of professional software developers. There
is an overlap of participants in this study and the previous
study on mini-maps. However, we expect that the learning
effect and its influence on the study results is negligible due
to the considerable time gap between the two studies. The
relatively small sample of 16 people limits the significance of
our results. Even though the participants did not receive any
form of compensation, many participants knew the conductor
of the conductor of the study personally. This might induce a
bias in favor of our approach.
The employed software landscapes and tasks were designed
to foster interaction with the visualization and be solvable
without prior knowledge about ExplorViz. Thus, this study did
not consider complex and arguably more realistic tasks that
go beyond the visual exploration of the employed software
landscapes.
B. Mini-Map Evaluation
Just as the semantic zoom feature, ExplorViz extended
by the mini-map implementation was evaluated in a user
study. The evaluation of the mini-map feature is motivated
by the question whether mini-maps are a useful addition to
3D software cities.
Setup The hardware setup is identical to the setup described
in Section VI-A.
Participants 14 people with a background in computer
science, either as a student or researcher, participated in the
study. Seven participants stated to have no prior experience
with ExplorViz, while 5 participants had some experience
and two participants ordinary or much experience. Participants
participated in the study in groups of two. However, the
participants each filled their own questionnaire independently
of one another.
Methodology At the beginning of the evaluation, partic-
ipants were introduced to ExplorViz. Following, the partic-
ipants were asked to explore all the features of the mini-
map in the “Distributed PetClinic” software landscape on
their own. This included the testing of different configurations
in the settings for the mini-map. Participants were always
allowed to ask questions about ExplorViz and the implemented
feature. After this first part, participants were asked to rate
the usability of the mini-map and its perceived usefulness
for the given software landscape. In a second part of the
evaluation, two participants joined a collaborative session in
ExplorViz. For this part, they were again asked to use the
implemented features of the mini-map, this time with a focus
on collaboration. Finally, the participants rated their experience
regarding the collaborative use of the mini-map and were
asked to give additional textual feedback.
Results The study was conducted in German. Therefore, we
translated the survey and the textual feedback for this section.
Enlarged Map (Q6)
Settings (Q5)
User Positioning (Q4)
Target Positioning (Q3)
Reliability (Q2)
Intuitive (Q1)
0
5
10
Number of Response
Questions on Usability and Helpfulness
Very
Rather
Indifferent
Somewhat
Fig. 9: Overview of quantitative feedback regarding various
features and aspects of the implemented mini-map.
In Figure 9, the quantitative feedback that was collected
after a participant explored the mini-map feature alone is
presented. When asked how intuitively the mini-map could
be used (Q1), no participant perceived it as non-intuitive.
In the textual feedback, it is stated that the mini-map helps
orientation as it is clear where the camera is currently posi-
tioned. Asked about the reliability of the mini-map (Q2), most
participants were very satisfied.
As ExplorViz uses OrbitControls, the marker indicating
the current position on the mini-map could be set to the
user’s position or to the position of the target that is orbited.
Comparing these options (Q3 and Q4), the given ratings are
very similar. One participant mentions that the positioning on
the target makes no sense to him/her, but that it might be useful
for other users. When asked about how helpful the provided
settings are (Q5), twelve of 14 participants rated it as rather or
very helpful. One participant stated that being able to control
which kind of elements are displayed could be helpful for
large projects. The enlarged mini-map was perceived as rather
or very helpful by twelve people, two people are indifferent
or think it is rather not helpful. The textual feedback mentions
that the enlarged mini-map is not intuitive and lacks interactive
features. One participant suggested to display additional text
whenever elements are hovered.
The remaining feedback for the first part includes sugges-
tions to allow users to teleport to a given point by clicking on
the mini-map and do not apply zoom to both the mini-map
and enlarged mini-map.
In Figure 10, the quantitative feedback regarding the collab-
orative use of the mini-map is illustrated. The reliability for
collaboration (Q9) is rated worse than for the single-user task
(Q2). The textual feedback makes it clear, that visualization
of other user’s markers did not work all the time and some
participant needed to reload the webpage to make it work.
The intuitive use (Q10) of the mini-map is also rated slightly
Teleport (Q12)
Markers (Q11)
Intuitive (Q10)
Reliability (Q9)
0
5
10
Number of Response
Helpfulness for Collaboration
Very
Rather
Indifferent
Somewhat
Fig. 10: Quantitative user feedback on collaborative use and
features of the mini-map.
worse than before (Q1). The textual feedback mostly criticizes
that the markers for other users are not shown when they are
outside the mini-map. In addition, the marker for other user’s
always show the user’s position whereas the own user’s marker
also could show the target’s position. Nonetheless, the markers
for user positions (Q11) were rated as rather or very helpful by
10 participants. The teleportation to other user’s position by
clicking on their marker on the mini-map (Q12) was perceived
as rather or very helpful by 13 participants.
Large Landscape Sample (Q8)
Distributed PetClinic (Q7)
0
5
10
Number of Response
Helpfulness for Software Landscape
Very
Rather
Indifferent
Somewhat
Fig. 11: User feedback on the helpfulness two different soft-
ware landscapes.
In Figure 11, the results for perceived helpfulness of the
mini-map for the two landscapes that were employed in the
evaluation are illustrated. It can be seen that the mini-map is
perceived as more helpful in the “Large Landscape Sample,”
which has more visual elements than the “Distributed Pet-
Clinic.”
Discussion We presume that the common use of mini-
maps in video games and adhering to established conventions
regarding the design of the mini-map, facilitated the use of the
mini-map for our study participants.
The indication that the mini-map feature is more helpful in
larger, more complex software landscapes (see Fig. 11) meets
our expectations. For software landscapes that only consist of
a single and simple application, the benefits for navigating the
visualization can be expected to be negligible.
Regarding the collaborative use of the mini-map, the feed-
back was mostly positive. The study revealed that our imple-
mentation has some shortcomings and did not work reliably in
all situations. However, the participants gave mostly positive
feedback and stated that the collaborative features may be
useful for the collaborative exploration of large landscapes.
Overall, the participants mostly criticized shortcomings in
the implementation of the mini-map, no participant stated that
the mini-map is obstructive or not helpful at all. Therefore,
we conclude that mini-maps can be a useful addition to
visualizations with 3D software cities.
Threats to Validity Again, the participants of the study
were mostly computer science students and thus are not rep-
resentatives for the group of professional software developers.
The sample size of 14 people is not large enough to generalize
our study results. Many participants knew the conductor of
the study which might induce a bias in favor of the mini-map
approach.
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We introduced approaches for semantic zoom and mini-
maps for 3D software cities using the example of ExplorViz.
The semantic zoom changes the visual appearance of displayed
elements and can reduce visual complexity depending on the
camera’s distance to the elements. The mini-map offers an
overview of the software landscape in the top right corner.
We evaluated our approaches in two studies. The collected
feedback from study participants is mostly positive. This
indicates that the concepts of semantic zoom and the mini-
map, known from related research and video games, are also
applicable to visualizations for 3D software cities.
There are many ways in which our approach could be
further extended. For semantic zoom, we plan to explore
a more mature animation system and smooth transitions to
change the appearance of more visual elements. The mini-
map could be extended with further visual indicators and
offer more visual customization options. Both semantic zoom
and the mini-map could be valuable additions for software
exploration collaborative virtual reality environments. To gain
further insight, an evaluation of a refined implementation with
software professionals would be desirable.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We want to thank the participants of the conducted studies
for their time and valuable feedback.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Merino, M. Ghafari, C. Anslow, and O. Nierstrasz, “A system-
atic literature review of software visualization evaluation,” Journal
of Systems and Software, vol. 144, pp. 165–180, 10 2018. DOI:
10.1016/J.JSS.2018.06.027
[2] S. Scalabrino, M. Linares-V´asquez, R. Oliveto, and D. Poshyvanyk, “A
comprehensive model for code readability,” Journal of Software: Evolu-
tion and Process, vol. 30, no. 6, p. e1958, 2018. DOI: 10.1002/smr.1958
[3] K. Bennett, V. Rajlich, and N. Wilde, “Software evolution and the staged
model of the software lifecycle,” Advances in Computers, vol. 56, p.
1–54, 2002. DOI: 10.1016/s0065-2458(02)80003-1
[4] J. Siegmund, “Program comprehension: Past, present, and future,”
in 2016 IEEE 23rd International Conference on Software Anal-
ysis, Evolution, and Reengineering (SANER), vol. 5, 2016. DOI:
10.1109/SANER.2016.35 pp. 13–20.
[5] A. R. Teyseyre and M. R. Campo, “An overview of 3d software visu-
alization,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 87–105, 2009. DOI: 10.1109/TVCG.2008.86
[6] C. Johnson, “Top scientific visualization research problems,” IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 13–17, 2004.
DOI: 10.1109/MCG.2004.20
[7] D. Keim, J. Kohlhammer, G. Ellis, and F. Mansmann, Mastering the
information age solving problems with visual analytics.
Eurographics
Association, 2010.
[8] A. R. Teyseyre and M. R. Campo, “An overview of 3d software visu-
alization,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 87–105, 2009. DOI: 10.1109/TVCG.2008.86
[9] R. M¨uller and D. Zeckzer, “Past, present, and future of 3d soft-
ware visualization: A systematic literature analysis,” 03 2015. DOI:
10.5220/0005325700630074
[10] C. Knight and M. Munro, “Comprehension with[in] virtual environment
visualisations,” in Proceedings Seventh International Workshop on Pro-
gram Comprehension, ser. WPC-99.
IEEE Comput. Soc, 1999. DOI:
10.1109/wpc.1999.777733
[11] R. Wettel and M. Lanza, “CodeCity: 3D visualization of large-scale soft-
ware,” ser. ICSE Companion ’08, 2008. DOI: 10.1145/1370175.1370188
p. 921–922.
[12] R.
Wettel,
M.
Lanza,
and
R.
Robbes,
“Software
systems
as
cities:
A
controlled
experiment,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
33rd
International Conference on Software Engineering, ser. ICSE ’11.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2011.
DOI: 10.1145/1985793.1985868. ISBN 9781450304450 p. 551–560.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/1985793.1985868
[13] F. Fittkau, A. Krause, and W. Hasselbring, “Hierarchical software
landscape visualization for system comprehension: A controlled ex-
periment,” in Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE Working Conference on
Software Visualization (VISSOFT 2015).
IEEE, Sep. 2015. DOI:
10.1109/VISSOFT.2015.7332413 pp. 36–45.
[14] M.-A. Storey, K. Wong, F. Fracchia, and H. Muller, “On integrating
visualization techniques for effective software exploration,” in VIZ ’97,
1997. DOI: 10.1109/INFVIS.1997.636784 pp. 38–45.
[15] V. Wiens, S. Lohmann, and S. Auer, “Semantic zooming for on-
tology graph visualizations,” in Proceedings of the Knowledge Cap-
ture Conference, ser. K-CAP 2017.
ACM, Dec. 2017. DOI:
10.1145/3148011.3148015 p. 1–8.
[16] M. Kasperowski, N. Rentz, S. Domr¨os, and R. von Hanxleden, “Kieler:
A text-first framework for automatic diagramming of complex systems,”
in Diagrammatic Representation and Inference.
Springer Nature
Switzerland, 2024. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-71291-3 33 p. 402–418.
[17] F. D. Luca, I. Hossain, K. Gray, S. Kobourov, and K. B¨orner,
“Multi-level tree based approach for interactive graph visualization
with semantic zoom,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/
1906.05996
[18] R. DeLine and K. Rowan, “Code canvas: zooming towards better
development environments,” in Proceedings of the 32nd ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Software Engineering - Volume 2, ser. ICSE
’10.
ACM, May 2010. DOI: 10.1145/1810295.1810331
[19] O. K¨oth and M. Minas, Structure, Abstraction, and Direct Manipulation
in Diagram Editors.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2002, p. 290–304.
[20] M. Frisch, R. Dachselt, and T. Br¨uckmann, “Towards seamless semantic
zooming techniques for uml diagrams,” in Proceedings of the 4th ACM
symposium on Software visualization, ser. Softvis ’08. ACM, Sep. 2008.
DOI: 10.1145/1409720.1409758 p. 207–208.
[21] S. Alam and P. Dugerdil, “Evospaces visualization tool: Exploring
software architecture in 3d,” in 14th Working Conference on Reverse En-
gineering (WCRE 2007). IEEE, Oct. 2007. DOI: 10.1109/wcre.2007.26.
ISSN 1095-1350 p. 269–270.
[22] K. Zagata and B. Medy´nska-Gulij, “Mini-map design features as a
navigation aid in the virtual geographical space based on video games,”
ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information, vol. 12, no. 2, 2023.
DOI: 10.3390/ijgi12020058
[23] R. Oberhauser, C. Silfang, and C. Lecon, “Code structure vi-
sualization using 3d-flythrough,” in 2016 11th International Con-
ference on Computer Science & Education (ICCSE), 2016. DOI:
10.1109/ICCSE.2016.7581608 pp. 365–370.
[24] P. Khaloo, M. Maghoumi, E. Taranta, D. Bettner, and J. Laviola, “Code
park: A new 3d code visualization tool,” in 2017 IEEE Working Con-
ference on Software Visualization (VISSOFT), 2017. DOI: 10.1109/VIS-
SOFT.2017.10 pp. 43–53.
[25] G. Balogh and A. Beszedes, “Codemetrpolis – a minecraft based
collaboration tool for developers,” in 2013 First IEEE Working Con-
ference on Software Visualization (VISSOFT), 2013. DOI: 10.1109/VIS-
SOFT.2013.6650528 pp. 1–4.
[26] M. Lanza and S. Ducasse, “Polymetric views - a lightweight vi-
sual approach to reverse engineering,” IEEE Transactions on Soft-
ware Engineering, vol. 29, no. 9, p. 782–795, Sep. 2003. DOI:
10.1109/tse.2003.1232284
[27] C. Anslow, S. Marshall, J. Noble, E. Tempero, and R. Biddle, “User
evaluation of polymetric views using a large visualization wall,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 5th International Symposium on Software Visualization,
ser. SOFTVIS ’10, 2010. DOI: 10.1145/1879211.1879218 p. 25–34.
[28] F. Fittkau, A. Krause, and W. Hasselbring, “Software landscape and
application visualization for system comprehension with ExplorViz,”
Information and Software Technology, vol. 87, pp. 259–277, 2017. DOI:
10.1016/j.infsof.2016.07.004
[29] W. Hasselbring, A. Krause, and C. Zirkelbach, “ExplorViz: Research
on software visualization, comprehension and collaboration,” Software
Impacts, vol. 6, Nov. 2020. DOI: 10.1016/j.simpa.2020.100034
[30] R. Wettel and M. Lanza, “Visualizing software systems as cities,” in
2007 4th IEEE International Workshop on Visualizing Software for
Understanding and Analysis.
IEEE, Jun. 2007. DOI: 10.1109/vis-
sof.2007.4290706
[31] A. van Hoorn, J. Waller, and W. Hasselbring, “Kieker: A frame-
work for application performance monitoring and dynamic software
analysis,” in Proceedings of the 3rd ACM/SPEC International Con-
ference on Performance Engineering, ser. ICPE ’12, 2012. DOI:
10.1145/2188286.2188326 p. 247–248.
[32] W. Hasselbring and A. van Hoorn, “Kieker: A monitoring framework
for software engineering research,” Software Impacts, vol. 5, p. 100019,
Aug. 2020. DOI: 10.1016/j.simpa.2020.100019
[33] D. G. Reichelt, M. Hansen, S. Yang, and W. Hasselbring, “Interoper-
ability From Kieker to OpenTelemetry: Demonstrated as Export to Ex-
plorViz,” in SSP 2024, 2025, pp. 20–22, PID: 20.500.12116/46200.
[34] S. Yang, D. G. Reichelt, R. Jung, M. Hansson, and W. Hasselbring,
“The Kieker Observability Framework Version 2,” in ICPE, 2025. DOI:
10.1145/3680256.3721972 pp. 11–15.
[35] A. Krause-Glau, M. Hansen, and W. Hasselbring, “Collaborative pro-
gram comprehension via software visualization in extended reality,”
Information and Software Technology, vol. 151, p. 107007, Nov. 2022.
DOI: 10.1016/j.infsof.2022.107007
[36] InfoVis:Wiki, “Semantic zoom,” https://infovis-wiki.net/wiki/Semantic
Zoom, [Accessed 08-16-2025].
[37] T. Buering, J. Gerken, and H. Reiterer, “User interaction with scat-
terplots on small screens - a comparative evaluation of geometric-
semantic zoom and fisheye distortion,” IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 829–836, 2006. DOI:
10.1109/TVCG.2006.187
[38] D. Luebke, Level of detail for 3D graphics.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.
[39] B. Shneiderman, “The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for
information visualizations,” in The Craft of Information Visualization,
2003. DOI: 10.1016/b978-155860915-0/50046-9 p. 364–371.
[40] S. Lloyd, “Least squares quantization in pcm,” IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 129–137, 1982. DOI:
10.1109/TIT.1982.1056489
[41] Y. Ren, U. Kamath, C. Domeniconi, and G. Zhang, “Boosted mean
shift clustering,” in Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
Databases, T. Calders, F. Esposito, E. H¨ullermeier, and R. Meo,
Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2014. DOI:
10.1007/978-3-662-44851-9 41 pp. 646–661.
[42] T. Roehm, R. Tiarks, R. Koschke, and W. Maalej, “How do profes-
sional developers comprehend software?” in 2012 34th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE).
IEEE, Jun. 2012. DOI:
10.1109/icse.2012.6227188
[43] W. Maalej, R. Tiarks, T. Roehm, and R. Koschke, “On the comprehen-
sion of program comprehension,” ACM TOSEM, vol. 23, no. 4, p. 1–37,
Sep. 2014. DOI: 10.1145/2622669
[44] M. Hansen, J. Bamberg, N. Baumann, and W. Hasselbring, “Supplemen-
tary data for: Semantic zoom and mini-maps for software cities,” May
2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15491590
